doc: Add compiler error troubleshooting guide (#912)
midnightntwrk/midnight-docs: docs/troubleshoot/compiler-errors.mdx

sidebar_label: Troubleshoot compiler errors
sidebar_position: 11
tags: [troubleshooting, compiler, errors]
---

# Troubleshoot compiler errors

This guide provides a comprehensive reference for troubleshooting compiler errors in Compact.

## Exit codes

The Compact compiler returns the following exit codes:

| Code | Meaning | Fix |
|------|---------|-----|
| 0 | Compilation succeeded | No action required |
| 1 | Bad command-line arguments | Check `compact compile --help` for correct flags |
| 255 | Compilation failed | Fix the reported source errors and recompile |

## Error severity levels

The Compact compiler uses the following error severity levels:

| Mechanism | Severity | Description |
|-----------|----------|-------------|
| `source-errorf` | Fatal | User-visible error with source location |
| `source-warningf` | Warning | Continuable warning with source location |
| `pending-errorf` | Deferred | Collected and shown together after the pass |
| `internal-errorf` | Fatal | Compiler internal bug; report this to the Compact team |
| `external-errorf` | Fatal | External tool or file system error |

## Lexer errors

> These errors occur during tokenization, before any parsing takes place.

Reviewer: Add this to the Vale word list.

> These errors occur during tokenization, before any parsing takes place.

Author: Added in the Vale terms PR.

### Unexpected end of file, newline, or character

The compiler returns the following messages:
- `"unexpected end of file"`
- `"unexpected newline"`
- `"unexpected character '<c>'"`

> **Triggers**: The compiler encounters an unclosed string literal, unclosed block comment, or invalid character in the source code.

Reviewer: Why isn't this three separate entries?

Author: They looked similar. I've separated them, though 🙂

**Fix**: Check for unclosed strings (`"…`), unclosed block comments (`/* …`), or characters that are not valid in Compact source code.

### Nested block comment

**Message**: `"attempt to nest block comment"`

**Triggers**: Using `/*` inside an already-open `/* */` block comment.

**Fix**: Compact does not support nested block comments. Use line comments (`//`) for inner comments, or restructure to avoid nesting.

### Numeric literal out of Field range

**Message**: `"<value> is out of Field range"`

**Triggers**: A numeric literal exceeds the maximum representable Field value.

**Fix**: Use a smaller number. Field values are bounded by the prime used in the ZK proof system.

### Invalid digit in binary literal

**Message**: `"unexpected digit <d> (expected 0 or 1)"`

**Triggers**: A digit other than `0` or `1` appears in a `0b…` literal.

**Fix**: Binary literals may only contain the digits `0` and `1`.

### Invalid digit in octal literal

**Message**: `"unexpected digit <d> (expected 0 through 7)"`

**Triggers**: A digit `8` or `9` appears in a `0o…` literal.

**Fix**: Octal literals may only contain digits `0` through `7`.

## Parser errors

> These errors occur after tokenization, while the compiler builds the AST.

Author: Added to vocabs in a separate PR

### Parse error

**Message**: `"parse error: found <token> looking for <expected>"`

**Triggers**: Any syntax that does not match the Compact grammar at the current parse position.

**Fix**: Read the location carefully. Common causes include:
- Missing semicolons at the end of statements
- Mismatched braces `{` / `}`
- Wrong or misspelled keyword
- Extra or missing commas in argument lists

> ### Unrecognized pragma setting

Author: Added to vocabs in a separate PR

---
title: Troubleshoot compiler errors

> description: Learn how to troubleshoot compiler errors in Compact

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
description: Common Compact compiler errors and their solutions, including lexer, parser, witness, disclosure, ZKIR, and runtime errors with fix instructions.
```

sidebar_label: Troubleshoot compiler errors
sidebar_position: 11

> tags: [troubleshooting, compiler, errors]

Reviewer 2: Tags should include 5–10 relevant terms with variations and synonyms focused on user intent.

```suggestion
tags: [troubleshooting, compiler, errors, compact, debugging, lexer, parser, runtime, witness, disclosure]
```

---

# Troubleshoot compiler errors

> This guide provides a comprehensive reference for troubleshooting compiler errors in Compact.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This guide covers common Compact compiler errors, their causes, and how to fix them.
```

### Unrecognized pragma setting

**Message**: `"unrecognized pragma setting <value>"`

**Triggers**: A `pragma` directive uses a value the compiler does not recognize.

**Fix**: Check supported pragma directives. Example of a valid pragma:

```compact
pragma language_version >= 0.22;
```

### File I/O errors

The compiler returns the following messages:
- `"error opening source file"`
- `"error reading source file"`
- `"<path> is a directory"`

**Triggers**: The compiler encounters an error opening or reading the specified source file, or the path points to a directory.

**Fix**: Verify the file path is correct, the file exists, and it has a `.compact` extension. Do not pass a directory path where the compiler expects a file.

## Witness and disclosure errors

These errors enforce Compact's privacy model around witness values.

### Undeclared witness disclosure

**Message**: `"potential witness-value disclosure must be declared but is not"`

**Triggers**: A witness value flows to the ledger or a public output without a `disclose()` wrapper.

**Fix**: Wrap the witness value in `disclose()` before it reaches any ledger state or public output:

```compact
disclose(witnessValue)
```

> The `disclose()` wrapper declares private data as safe to write to the public ledger state.

Reviewer 2: **Accuracy (rule 3)**: `disclose()` is a compile-time annotation with zero runtime effect — it signals that the developer intentionally exposes witness-derived data. The current wording ("declares private data as safe to write") implies a runtime safety mechanism, which could mislead developers into thinking `disclose()` performs validation.

```suggestion
The `disclose()` annotation signals that you intentionally expose witness-derived data to the public ledger. It has no runtime effect — it satisfies the compiler's disclosure analysis.
```

Author: This feels like we're overly complicating the explanation of disclose()

### Witness returns contract-typed value

**Message**: `"invalid type <T> for witness <W> return value: witness return values cannot include contract values"`

**Triggers**: A witness function declares a return type that includes a contract-typed value.

> **Fix**: Witnesses must return primitive types only. Remove contract-typed values from the witness return type; pass any needed information as primitive fields.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Fix**: Remove any contract-typed values from the witness return type. Witnesses can return structs, enums, and other regular types, but not contract values. Pass any contract-related information as individual fields instead.
```

### Cross-contract calls not yet supported

**Message**: `"cross-contract calls are not yet supported"`

**Triggers**: The contract attempts a cross-contract call, which the ZKIR output stage does not yet support.

**Fix**: This is a current compiler limitation. Restructure to avoid cross-contract calls until the feature is available.

### ZKIR non-zero exit status

**Message**: `"zkir returned a non-zero exit status <N>"`

**Triggers**: The external ZKIR compilation tool exited with an error.

**Fix**: Review the output for details on the unsupported operation. Check for operations in circuits that the ZKIR backend does not yet support.

## Runtime errors

These errors originate from compiled contracts executing in the Midnight runtime, not from the compiler itself.

### Base error class

**Class**: `CompactError`

**Description**: `CompactError` is the base class for all contract runtime errors. Catch this type to handle any Compact contract error generically.

### Failed assertion

**Message**: `"failed assert: <message>"`

**Triggers**: A Compact `assert` expression evaluated to `false` at runtime.

> **Fix**: Investigate the assertion condition. The `<message>` text is the string provided to `assert`; use it to locate the assertion in your contract source and determine why the condition was not satisfied.

Reviewer 2: The second sentence is 34 words. Split at the semicolon for readability.

```suggestion
**Fix**: Investigate the assertion condition. The `<message>` text is the string you provided to `assert`. Use it to locate the assertion in your contract source and determine why the condition was not satisfied.
```

### Runtime type error

**Message**: `"type error: <who> <what> at <where>; expected value of type <type> but received <value>"`

**Triggers**: A runtime type mismatch in the generated code, typically caused by a mismatch between declared witness return types and the actual values produced at runtime.

**Fix**: Check witness return types. Ensure that the TypeScript witness implementation returns values that conform to the types declared in the Compact contract.

### Version mismatch

**Message**: `"version mismatch: compiled code expects X.Y.Z, runtime is A.B.C"`

**Triggers**: You compiled the smart contract with one version of the Compact compiler but run it against a different version of `@midnight-ntwrk/compact-runtime`.

> **Fix**: Update `@midnight-ntwrk/compact-runtime` in your project to the version that matches the compiler used to build the contract, or recompile the contract with the compiler version that matches your runtime. 

Reviewer 2: This sentence is 34 words. Split at the natural break.

```suggestion
**Fix**: Update `@midnight-ntwrk/compact-runtime` in your project to match the compiler version used to build the contract. Alternatively, recompile the contract with the compiler version that matches your runtime.
```

> :::info

Reviewer 2: Admonitions should use bracket syntax with a descriptive title.

```suggestion
:::info[Version compatibility]
```
